README.md, before:

# Prior-Data Fitted Networks Can Do Mixed-Variable Bayesian Optimization (PFNs4MVBO)

This repository extends the work done in [PFNs4BO](https://github.com/automl/PFNs4BO) by adapting Prior-Data Fitted Networks (PFNs) to handle Bayesian optimization settings that involve both numerical and categorical variables. 

### Background

PFNs are a type of transformer that have been trained to do Bayesian inference. As input, they take a training data set with a variable number of features and observations, and a test data set containing only inputs. In one forward pass, they output predictive distributions over possible target values. PFNs are trained using synthetic datasets that are sampled from a Prior-Data Generating Model (PDGM), with the choice of PDGM being extremely flexible. 

In [PFNs4BO](https://github.com/automl/PFNs4BO), PFNs demonstrated strong performance as surrogate models for Bayesian optimization. In our [work](https://github.com/TimShinners/PFNs4MVBO/blob/main/PFNsCanDoMVBO.pdf), PFNs were trained using a set of Gaussian processes that incorporated different categorical kernels ([BODi](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.01774), [Casmopolitan](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.07188), [CoCaBO](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08878)). These PFNs performed similarly to their respective Gaussian processes, at a fraction of the computational expense. 

### Use our models

Below is a quick implementation of a Bayesian optimization loop, using the [MCBO](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.09803) framework, with a mixed-variable PFN as the surrogate model. 


```python
from mcbo import task_factory
from pfns4mvbo import MVPFNOptimizer


# Define dimensionality of the task
num_dims = 3
cat_dims = 4
task_kws = dict(variable_type=['num'] + ['nominal'] * cat_dims,
                            num_dims=[num_dims] + [1] * cat_dims,
                            num_categories=np.random.randint(2, 10, cat_dims).tolist())

# define the task to optimize, and the search space
task = task_factory(task_name=task_name, **task_kws)
search_space = task.get_search_space()


# define the BO optimizer, which uses a PFN as a surrogate function
optimizer = MVPFNOptimizer(search_space=search_space,
                           input_constraints=task.input_constraints,
                           pfn='casmopolitan',
                           acq_func='ei',
                           acq_optim_name='is')

# initialize the optimizer
x_init = search_space.sample(n_init)
y_init = task(x_init)
optimizer.initialize(x_init, y_init)

# Run BO loop
n_iterations = 100

for i in range(n_iterations):

    x = optimizer.suggest()
    y = task(x)

    optimizer.observe(x, y)

```






### Notes

**PFNsCanDoMVBO.pdf** is a pdf of my master's thesis.

The fully trained PFNs that were used in the experiments are stored in the folder **trained_PFNs**

The scripts **train_COCABO.py**, **train_CASMO.py**, **train_BODI.py**, and **train_MIXED.py** contain code that will define hyperparameters and training settings, then train new PFNs from scratch. This procedure is discussed in Chapter 3 of the thesis.

**evaluate_pfn.sh** contains the code used to evaluate the quality of trained PFNs, prior to experimentation. This procedure is discussed and used in Chapter 4 of the thesis. 

**run_experiments.sh** contains the code used to conduct experiments with the trained PFNs. This code is discussed and used in Chapter 5 of the thesis. 

**generateThesisFigs.ipynb** contains code that was used to generate the figures in the thesis.

The thesis was written in RMarkdown files that were knit using the [thesisdown](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown) package. The R files used to produce the PDF of the thesis are stored in **thesis_files**.

Commit message:

added mention of MVBO_demo.ipynb

README.md, after:

# Prior-Data Fitted Networks Can Do Mixed-Variable Bayesian Optimization (PFNs4MVBO)

This repository extends the work done in [PFNs4BO](https://github.com/automl/PFNs4BO) by adapting Prior-Data Fitted Networks (PFNs) to handle Bayesian optimization settings that involve both numerical and categorical variables. 

### Background

PFNs are a type of transformer that have been trained to do Bayesian inference. As input, they take a training data set with a variable number of features and observations, and a test data set containing only inputs. In one forward pass, they output predictive distributions over possible target values. PFNs are trained using synthetic datasets that are sampled from a Prior-Data Generating Model (PDGM), with the choice of PDGM being extremely flexible. 

In [PFNs4BO](https://github.com/automl/PFNs4BO), PFNs demonstrated strong performance as surrogate models for Bayesian optimization. In our [work](https://github.com/TimShinners/PFNs4MVBO/blob/main/PFNsCanDoMVBO.pdf), PFNs were trained using a set of Gaussian processes that incorporated different categorical kernels ([BODi](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.01774), [Casmopolitan](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.07188), [CoCaBO](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08878)). These PFNs performed similarly to their respective Gaussian processes, at a fraction of the computational expense. 

### Use our models

Below is a quick implementation of a Bayesian optimization loop, using the [MCBO](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.09803) framework, with a mixed-variable PFN as the surrogate model. For more details on implementation, see MVBO_demo.ipynb.


```python
from mcbo import task_factory
from pfns4mvbo import MVPFNOptimizer


# Define dimensionality of the task
num_dims = 3
cat_dims = 4
task_kws = dict(variable_type=['num'] + ['nominal'] * cat_dims,
                            num_dims=[num_dims] + [1] * cat_dims,
                            num_categories=np.random.randint(2, 10, cat_dims).tolist())

# define the task to optimize, and the search space
task = task_factory(task_name='ackley', **task_kws)
search_space = task.get_search_space()


# define the BO optimizer, which uses a PFN as a surrogate function
optimizer = MVPFNOptimizer(search_space=search_space,
                           input_constraints=task.input_constraints,
                           pfn='casmopolitan',
                           acq_func='ei',
                           acq_optim_name='is')

# initialize the optimizer
x_init = search_space.sample(n_init)
y_init = task(x_init)
optimizer.initialize(x_init, y_init)

# Run BO loop
for i in range(100):

    x = optimizer.suggest()
    y = task(x)

    optimizer.observe(x, y)

```






### Notes

**PFNsCanDoMVBO.pdf** is a pdf of my master's thesis.

The fully trained PFNs that were used in the experiments are stored in the folder **trained_PFNs**

The scripts **train_COCABO.py**, **train_CASMO.py**, **train_BODI.py**, and **train_MIXED.py** contain code that will define hyperparameters and training settings, then train new PFNs from scratch. This procedure is discussed in Chapter 3 of the thesis.

**evaluate_pfn.sh** contains the code used to evaluate the quality of trained PFNs, prior to experimentation. This procedure is discussed and used in Chapter 4 of the thesis. 

**run_experiments.sh** contains the code used to conduct experiments with the trained PFNs. This code is discussed and used in Chapter 5 of the thesis. 

**generateThesisFigs.ipynb** contains code that was used to generate the figures in the thesis.

The thesis was written in RMarkdown files that were knit using the [thesisdown](https://github.com/ismayc/thesisdown) package. The R files used to produce the PDF of the thesis are stored in **thesis_files**.
